This audio file is a lecture from an electrical engineering course where the professor introduces the **M5Stack device** (an ESP32-based platform) and reviews Python programming fundamentals through the lens of solving circuit problems.

### **Transcription**

**Professor:** All right, everybody. Good morning. Welcome to our one-day-a-week class because probably Monday is going to be canceled too. Who knows? We've got another snowstorm coming, so we'll see. But hopefully, you all stay nice and warm and cozy. 

Today should be fun because today we get to gain access to the device we're going to be using for a lot of the rest of the class㻡t least as a platform for us to learn a good variety of programming skills and applications that are appropriate for electrical engineers. So, you're going to end up working with a lot of embedded systems, whether they're embedded systems that are part of a robotics system or part of a car, right? Part of an industrial control system鍟hey're everywhere. And they're increasingly actually more like this than like a microcontroller. 

There's definitely work to do that, but the number of times you will be tasked to build an integrated circuit that has literally everything on it is precisely zero probably in your life outside of a classroom environment. So, most of the time, your work is integrating. And if you ever have to do that work of kind of putting things on a circuit board with a microcontroller and putting all the resistors and capacitors and everything on there, it's likely to build something like this. 

So, there's good reason to learn these sorts of platforms and then how they talk to the rest of the world, right? So how they talk to things like a network server, and directly to your computer or to a mobile phone or whatever. And so you're going to get one of these today, either the orange or the yellow variety. I have feelings about both of them, but we have sort of a variety of these because they stopped making the red ones, and so we got the yellow ones, orange, red鎸 don't know exactly what color this is. But you will get one of the two, probably a yellow one because I have more of those.

So, welcome. We're going to kind of continue on with the last lecture because I didn't really get a chance to finish it. But we are definitely going to get into building applications for this device today. So, let me open up... oh gosh, everything is everywhere. The lecture. I did not drag that over there yet, but I will. But we're going to open up that little programming lecture. 

The other thing is, you should have seen on Discord𤪳ecause everybody signed in today, of course鎆ou should have seen that you have this link that lets you get credit for Google Cloud actually, which that allows you to do anything within the Google Cloud ecosystem. One of those things is you can generate an API key. That API key can be used for AI-integrated applications. It can be used for coding tools that need access to the Google API. It can also be used to spin up network servers. There's actually a lot of reasons you might want to use this credit. 

If you aren't careful, it's going to go really quick. Fifty dollars is probably what in a company right now? It's probably what most active programming engineers are spending in a couple days. So, you're not doing that kind of work, right? You're not processing codebases of millions of lines of code. And so you're not going to go through that allocation as quickly as somebody might in industry. But I will warn you, it does go quick depending on what you do and what tools you use. So, just something to be careful of. 

All right, so here is our programming lecture. And we kind of got through the Python installation a little bit and then the solving of a simple problem, right? And so I think it's worthwhile to consider how do we solve this without using any AI tools, right? So hopefully that you did something like this in Info 2000. Hopefully you've had some circuits courses and so this isn't just you following along; you should have some sort of understanding of concepts like voltage and current. 

But let's go and solve this simple problem in Python together, and then we'll talk a little bit more about Python programming and programming in general. This is still kind of in the review cycle, even though we are four days into class now. We should be further, but we're not. 

All right, so how do we go sort of about solving this problem? How do I think about solving these problems? Generally speaking, if this were a project or something like that, what I would do is I would create a new folder and then I would initialize that folder as a Git repository and then I would go to town making these things, right? Now, when you're solving assignments, it𠏋 a little flip because typically you'd go to GitHub and clone the repository to your computer and then go from there. Either way is valid because you can go from a repository on your computer to a repository in GitHub, or you can go the other way. Either way is perfectly valid. 

Sometimes I like to go to GitHub first and create the repository because then I get the link to GitHub, but it really is not a whole lot of work to go the other way. And by the way, there are command-line tools that make all this actually really simple if you kind of get into that in practice of doing that a lot, where you just use the GitHub command-line little tool and that makes all the links for you. 

But let's go to a folder on our computer that we can access. So, `cd` in my case is going to be `d/git_repo`. It's going to be a little different for you all. I'm going to throw this just in a temporary folder, and I'm going to make a directory, say `example_ele_2045`, and then `cd` into that, and then `git init`. Right? So, just initialize an empty repository. Very, very simple. And that just allows me to start adding things, right? And so let's... and it also gives me sort of a nice place to use a code editor that is directory-based. So `code .` will get me into that. Remember, with `code .`, you can get that working on Mac or on Windows or on Linux, or just open up your code editor and now you can do something in there, right? 

We're not going to use any AI tools yet today. I will introduce a little bit about an AI tool in a minute because I really like it, but we're going to just kind of program a simple Python program now. So `main.py` is usually what I go to. App.py works. You have to be a little careful, by the way, with the naming of your Python files. This is something that maybe Info 2000 you remember from it or not, but try not to name it something that might be the name of a library, like don't name it `string.py` because this causes you problems when you import libraries. The first place that Python looks for when you do an import statement is it looks at the current directory, and if you have something named that import, it's going to import that and not import other things. And so you do have to be a little careful with the naming of your files. `main.py` is a go-to for me. `app.py` works. But just try to be a little careful about how you name things.

And so let's go back to our problem that we're trying to solve. So, solve a simple problem. So, solve for the output voltage and the power dissipation of each resistor. So how do we do this? Well, to figure this out, there's a variety of different methods that you can use from circuits. But the simple one鎸 mean, you gotta look at this actually and say what is this? Well, it's a voltage divider. So this is actually one of the most common circuits, one of the most useful circuits out there in the world. It's how do we take one voltage and essentially convert it into another voltage. At least, this is a very simple way to do it. 

So, if you have a known voltage, say from a battery𤧥ost likely it's going to be from some sort of regulated power supply𤪳ut I need to get some sort of other voltage. Voltage being essentially the source of potential energy that allows you to do electrical work. So we've got this $V_{in}$ here, so this is sort of a known voltage. And you've got this $V_{out}$ here, right? So, find out what that is given these two values. 

And in practice, you actually do sort of the flip of this. You say, "Well, what I want is a particular $V_{out}$, how do I get that from a voltage?" And then what are sort of my considerations of that? So, the easiest one to kind of work your way through is if these two resistors are equal, it's going to be half, which makes some kind of sense to you, right? So if you have the same value resistor, whatever that value is㻡nd that's an important consideration鎆ou are going to have half of the output voltage. So if you have five volts, this being zero volts or ground, then you'd have two and a half volts. For ten, you would have five volts. And it doesn't matter what resistors you choose for that. 

In fact, even if you just used a bare wire and you happened to put it right in the middle, you would get half because wires have resistance as well, even though we don't tend to think of wires having resistance because it's very little in practice compared to a dedicated resistor, which inhibits the flow, the movement of electrons, right? Or charge, if you want to think about it in a positive way, through this material and that wastes energy, consumed essentially or dispensed as heat. So these resistors get hot if a lot of current is in them. So, a lot of electrons kind of pushing their way through. 

The value of these resistors ultimately is going to determine how much current is in there. And so the current is actually going to be determined according to Ohm's law. So, Ohm's law𤪔ow many people in here have not taken circuits? A few people have not taken circuits. And so this is like, what are you talking about? What the heck is Ohm's law? Maybe you've heard of Ohm's law before. But voltage is related to, directly related to resistance. So $V = IR$ is Ohm's law. And then you can rearrange that to find other quantities. And so voltage in volts is equal to current in amperes times resistance in ohms. The units matter, right? So if you don't have those units then you gotta convert them. 

So $V = IR$, and we can figure that out. And just some simple rules. The basic rule is that resistors in series add, and so the total resistance of these two resistors is $R_1 + R_2$. Very, very easy. And so we can actually solve for the current in this very easily and that's ultimately how we are going to end up with what is this voltage, right? So when we have $V_{in}$, right? And we have a known total resistance, $R_1 + R_2$, we can figure out the current by taking the voltage and then dividing it by the sum of the resistors. So let's say this $V_{in}$ is 10 and $R_1$ and $R_2$ are 5 each, then we are going to have a current of 1, 1 ampere. 

And then what ends up happening is that that 1 ampere is going to move through each of these resistors and we can actually figure out how much of that voltage is lost or dropped across each of these resistors. If it's 1 ampere and each of these is 5, you're going to lose 5 across each of them. Ultimately, you're going to end up at 0, right? But that means this $V_{out}$ here would be 5. So we lost 5 volts going across. 

So how do we write a program to actually solve this, right? So the goal again is to figure out the output voltage and then we'll talk about power dissipation in the two resistors. But like, how do we actually set that up, right? So usually in the setup of a problem like this, we're going to say what we know, right? So what are our input values? Right? So we've got a $V_{in}$ of some sort and so let's say $V_{in}$ is going to be some value. And I'm just going to assign it up here. Now you can get it from a variety of different places. Maybe this is something that you ask the user for or something like that. You can do an `input` in Python. 

But we'll just solve it right now. Of course, AI is going to give me a lot of help. How the heck do I actually turn off AI? Whatever, it's fine. And then let's put in our other values that we supposedly know. So we have our $R$ values and so I'll put in $R_1$ as 5, we'll put in $R_2$ as 5 as well, okay? And our goal is to find $V_{out}$. So we're going to compute $V_{out}$, right? So some time down the road, we're going to print $V_{out}$, okay? So let's... I'll write it out even though it doesn't... it's not ready yet. Right? So that's our goal. Print whatever $V_{out}$ is and then we're going to have the input... or we're going to have to compute what this is from these known inputs. 

Right? So the first thing is let's figure out our total resistance, all right? So I'll call it `r_eq` (sometimes called equivalent resistance). That's going to be $R_1 + R_2$. Easy to figure out. And then AI is helping me now. I told you we wouldn't use AI, but I don't know how to turn it off right now. I'll figure it out at some point. And it's telling me exactly what to do, which is actually not correct. Well, it is telling me how to solve $V_{out}$, never mind. It is correct; it's just skipping some steps. 

All right, I'm trying to go step by step. So the first thing is we'll find our equivalent resistance. By the way, this is common to Python. I'm just going to do series resistors, that's fine. And now let's get our current, all right? So `i_in` typically is going to be equal to the $V_{in}$ over the `r_eq`. And it's giving me that this is Ohm's law, okay? So we're using Ohm's law to figure out what the current is going through that resistor or the equivalent set of resistances. 

And then we can figure out the voltage drop across $V_1$ or $R_1$. So I'll say `vr1`, and it's giving me exactly what that is: `i_in * r1`. So the voltage across $R_1$. It's going to give me the `vr2` if we want to. Is... what we actually know it's just going to be... we could do this a few different ways because all the voltage has to drop, so we could take $V_{in}$ and subtract `vr1` and we'll get `vr2`. 

All right? So we've got the values that we're going to probably need, right? And we can figure out $V_{out}$ pretty easily. So $V_{out}$ is $V_{in} - vr1$, right? So going back over here, what's going to be $V_{out}$? Well, it's going to be whatever $V_{in}$ was plus whatever... or minus whatever we lost over $R_1$. So now we got $V_{r2}$ and we can also do $V_{out}$ now. So $V_{out}$ is going to be equal to that, okay? And we can print it. 

So if we run this, which銄emember running this is a few different ways. I always want to point this out because a lot of people just run into this problem a lot. You got to be using the right interpreter. Now with this, it's not going to matter because this is literally stock Python. Any Python will work with this. We haven't done anything. We haven't imported any libraries, any packages or anything like that. But remember you've got a lot. I've got a ton. 

And so maybe you want to use the one that I created for the class, right? So I think I did this... I think I did it as `ele_2045`. I clean them up every once in a while because I tend to just make them all the time. But we can run it in that one if we want to run it in VS Code and also get all the sort of what's called linting sometimes𤩦ust kind of figuring out if your programs are valid given the current environment that you're in. 

Or we can just go over and run things from here, right? So we can `conda activate ele_2045`, right? Then I'm going to be in my 2045 environment and then we can `python main.py`. Run it and we get five. Great. We could, of course, put some syntax around this or some nicer printing out at it. I like to use formatted strings a lot so we can say something like `print(f"V_out = {v_out}")` and we might put in `volts`, right? Something like that. And if we save that, go back over and run it, we now get `V_out = 5.0 volts`, right? 

Formatted strings: really nice. We can say like exactly how to print this. We could say like `:.2f` or something like that, and that'll give us a formatted output𨫎ell, I didn't force it to use it, but it would give up to two values here. So if we change these so it would be something... let's make $R_2$ some weird value like 54 and run this again. Then we're going to get... oh, I didn't put the `f` there, that's why. Now we got it: `9.2 volts`. 

All right, so you can do a lot of different things㻖ormatting output, things like that, okay? But this is kind of the general structure of how you write Python programs, right? Is you initialize your repository, set up what's known, right? Solve the problem, whatever that is. You can use AI to help you or whatever, and then you print out some output for the user. 

This is actually a lot of what I would say historically electrical engineers have done. They've written scripts to solve analytic problems. And this is where MATLAB became really, really popular, you know, probably 30 years ago, where you were doing a lot of this just "I need it to solve very quickly, maybe it's a very large elaborate setup, right? It's something that, you know, maybe some person in my cubicle next to me solved, right?" Historical way of you're using the computer very much as a calculator. I need it to do some complex thing right, right? Verifiably correct and it's going to run from top to bottom. It's not going to have really any, you know, complicated logic to it. It's just pure computation, brute force muscle to get a problem solved. 

And there's still some of that. I'd say it's a little less common than it used to be. Things have evolved, right? So everyone is expected to be able to write really sophisticated programs now, and it gets actually quite a bit more complicated. And we talked about Git and GitHub before, so I'm not going to go over that again. I'm not going to do it again either. Although at this point, we might actually want to go ahead and commit it. 

So let's go `git add .`, `git commit -m "First commit with a temporary solution for V_out only."` We don't have to push things, right? Committing is the act of adding a change, right, to your chain of changes, right, your Git repository. Pushing is "I want it to go over to GitHub." And we could try to write `push` here and it's going to say "I have no idea what you're talking about, there's no remote, you better add a remote." I haven't set up GitHub yet, so we have nowhere to push to. And that could be another actually folder in our computer if we wanted to push it out to that other folder, but we don't need to do that here. 

All right, so back over here. I can continue to solve this. I guess I should. So if we wanted to figure out the power in each resistor, it's very easy since we did actually all of the work of finding all these values. Power in a resistor is simply $I^2 \times R$, right? Or $V^2 / R$. There's actually a lot of different ways to solve it because Ohm's law can be rearranged in a bunch of different ways. But $I^2 \times R$ is the power in a resistor in watts. And so we can solve that pretty easily with `pr1`, and it's going to just tell me: power in a resistor, you can do it `v * i`. So that's another way you could do it. Actually like that way, it's probably simplest. I don't have to do any squares. 

And then of course it's going to give me my `pr2` as well, as power resisted by the `v2`, okay? This is just rearrangement. So $I^2R$ is the way I like to think about power because that is probably the most useful way to think about power in practice. That when you have high currents, you have very high, high power output. So current is bad when you're talking about sort of like heat generation and things like that because the higher the current, the higher the power output in a resistor because big heat loss. 

Resistors actually have a power rating, and so if you take out your typical resistor, it might be rated for like 500 milliwatts. And if you exceed that for too long, you're going to end up with burned resistors. Actually, resistive heating is a thing. It's not the most efficient way to create heat, but a lot of your houses or apartments or whatever might have resistive heating as a backup to your heat pump or something like that, which is a more efficient way to create heat. 

And so if you have a car that has like heated seats, it's probably using resistive heating. It's literally just running high currents through resistors to generate heat. That's it. So it's a very valid way to generate heat, but it's also not very efficient. 

All right, so we can also print this out, right? So `v_out` is that, and I guess comma and let it do that. `pr1`... it knows how to complete this pretty well. I'm happy with that. We'll run this and we'll figure out all the power outputs of these. `python main.py`, and it's going to print... I mean, how do I know it's right? I think this is going to be your primary job actually going forward: is just like, how do you know that this answer is correct? How do you know that it did what you thought it was going to do? 

Right? These are just numbers. These鎆ou could try to verify the math. That's actually a whole 'nother topic in computing of sort of validating programs and knowing that they are true. You can earn big money in that field actually if you go to work at like NASA and things like that because when you send a something to space and it needs to work... how do you know it's going to work? It's a very hard thing actually in practice to prove that a program is going to work every single time. It's a math problem more than anything else. 

But you know, you can get very close to there by simply knowing the values𡐤ike knowing the answer before you run the program, right? And so that's why I started this with, you know, the 5, 5, right? So I know the answer to this because it's really simple math. I hit play there, but I can also just run it down here. And so this makes sense, right? So I get five volts as the $V_{out}$. The power in $R_1$ is 5 watts. Why is the power 5 watts? Well, it's𨫎e know the current from this is 1 amp. $I^2R$, right? So $1^2 \times 5$, 5 watts. 5 watts. So that all made sense. 

Let's see if we did something else, like let's make the first resistor... let's do 20 for this one, all right? So roughly one-fifth of the voltage should be lost over $R_1$ because it's the smaller resistor, right? And then four-fifths should be lost over $R_2$. And so let's see what the answer is for those. Let's verify, make sure that things are right. 

All right, so $V_{out}$ is 8 volts. We lost 2 volts over the first resistor, meaning the output is 8 volts. All right, the power in $R_1$ is 0.8 watts. We'd have to figure out the $I$, but it makes sense that four times the amount of power is also lost over $R_2$, okay? So $I^2R$, very, very important. You can see you're going to get actually a lot. Maybe this exceeds what you can鍟ells you what dissipation you need for that resistor. Power dissipation. Or maybe tells you you need to use much bigger resistors, right? 

So we can increase the size of these resistors proportionally and you'll see that it goes down. So I add a zero to each of those, save that, and we'll see that the power comes down. Notice the voltage doesn't change. Very important thing, right? So you can use really, really big resistors, all right? It does make everything very much more sensitive, and so there's a tradeoff there. 

But normally with voltage dividers, we tend to use big resistors and then we tend to put the rest of that through an amplification circuit that makes the amount of current, right, that we need to sort of keep those stable very, very low. And so we use an amplifier instead. So we typically use big resistors in the many-kilohm range for voltage dividers and we use amplifiers to keep that voltage steady on the output. You'll do these things. I'm not worried about teaching you the theory of electric circuits. You're going to learn all about these topics in other classes if you haven't taken them already. 

But this sort of thing is still very useful of being able to solve problems that, you know, I just write out the computation and I get the answer. Now this is trivial. You could do this with a calculator, and you should do this with a calculator; you really shouldn't write programs for this. But where it starts to matter is, well, I need to solve this for a thousand resistors, right? Or I need to solve this for a very complex network, and I need to run a program that can do that. And so being able to write these kind of programs, read these kind of programs, still important. 

But mostly going through this as the setup process, right? So from a building script standpoint: initialize a Git repository, start writing your inputs, write out what you need, use AI tools to help you, verify your output, and make sure you continue to commit your work. So `git add .`, `git status`. We should always write that to make sure we're not committing things accidentally, right? We could also go over to Git... go over to VS Code and now look at our changes this way. 

So that's also a valid way to go about things, right? Nice thing about here is you can just kind of click on that and generate a commit message and commit it with that. It's kind of a better way, better strategy to go through now. So rather than you writing the commit message, let AI write the commit message. It's going to do a better job. It's going to tell you what you think you did, right? And it's going to show you exactly what you changed throughout that. 

Making more commits are generally better, all right? So I'm not saying you should commit every time you write a line of code, that's ridiculous. Like, every time you make like a logical step forward, even if it's wrong, commit it. It's okay for it to be wrong. Now, when you think about pushing, you want to have a different mentality. Pushing means somebody else needs my work, all right? You don't have to push all the time, but somebody else needs my work. Maybe they're building off of it, maybe you know, I worked a whole day on this, somebody else worked a whole day鍟here's a chance we overlapped. We need to make sure that we're merging and taking care of that process because merges can be very painful if we've been editing the same file. 

And so again, somebody else needs my work. So you should be committing all the time. You're only for the most part working by yourself, and so commit all the time. You only really need to push every once in a while. Now, it doesn't hurt you to push, right? It can be very annoying when people push all the time when you're working on a big team. It doesn't hurt you and it's a really good form of backup. And so say you know, somebody spills coffee on your computer, right? You just lost your work if you haven't been pushing to GitHub. 

And so pushing is not bad in your particular case, but you should know what that act does. That act shares to a remote. And right, that means somebody else needs it, or I need to back it up or something like that. But committing is very cheap, doesn't require any internet, all runs very locally𨫎ell, unless you're using AI to comment on it or generate a commit message, then I suppose it's running locally... or requires internet. But you can always write out your own messages as well. 

All right, and so we've got our chain of commits happening, this graph here. Remember we could have branches and things like that. All right, so we finished that one off. Let's continue on. So again, share it through GitHub, go through that process, we committed again. 

Let's talk about some more complicated stuff though. So again, this is mostly still review of Python. What are the different things that you can do in Python? Probably the most powerful thing you can do with a computer is process large amounts of data. That's what they were built for. Period. End of discussion. They were not built to do simple calculations by hand, right? Right, if you can write it down on a piece of paper, that is not what a computer was built for. A computer was built for "I need to process billions of things," and no set of humans could do this by hand reliably, right? Computer'll do it reliably every single time. 

And so you really need to know these like containers and things like that. These are going to be used commonly in programming because that's how computers process things in bulk in memory, all right? So these objects are an important concept in Python particularly. They're not a generally important concept in computing, but they are sort of a way of managing complexity of programs. When you see AI write programs, it's going to use your own extendable or your own objects, classes, a decent amount to do what's known as encapsulate functionality. 

And so they'll𤤖ftentimes programmers will create domain-level objects to hold things that are relevant to that domain. So if I were writing a program about a class of students, I might have, you know, an object called Course, and that object called Course has a list of people in the course, right? Students in the course. Maybe the name of the course, things like that. Domain-level things that are not about Python, they're about the problem you're trying to solve. And so you create classes a lot when you are writing a program about a specific domain and you need to have knowledge of that domain easier to sort of wrap your head around, right? 

So now you're teaching ten different courses, right? And now you've got a list of courses that each have a list of students and things like that inside. You don't need these things, but they can be useful ways, sometimes known as abstractions, to describe what you're trying to do in a simpler manner. 

And so Python actually is built on all of that, right? It's built on objects, and so even your like basic numbers are objects in Python. And so everything's an object in Python, everything has a class that describes that object, the data that's inside it, and the functionality that it has. And so like the `int` object has the ability to add numbers and things like that. Or add integers to it. 

Another one, string is a very important one. So string data is super common. It's become increasingly important I would say with large language models because all they do is process strings. But strings are everywhere. Strings are how we communicate, right? All the data on here for the most part is a string on this slide. Your name's a string, right? All of our books, all of our knowledge, all of our PDFs out there珦tring, string, string, string, string, right? The entire web is text. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). And so strings are really, really important and lots of operations you can do on strings珦plitting them up and capitalizing them and finding words inside them and things like that, various patterns and stuff. So string class is really important. 

And then of course the `bool` class𤪔ow could I forget that? The `bool` class: true and false. That's what computers are built on, right? True and false. We've talked about this, ones and zeros. And so classes, they're really, really important in Python. You got these basic types that everything else is built on, right? So just strings and integers and bools銄eally, just you take bools and literally build the entirety of computing on top of bools𤪳ut you have these kind of basic classes that are in Python. 

For electrical engineers, when you kind of get into more complex circuitry, more complex like probably in your feedback class, maybe your linear systems class, you'll run into complex numbers a decent amount when you start talking about... or maybe like circuits, like higher-level circuits, you're going to run into your complex... needing to use complex numbers a decent amount. And so in Python you can directly write that as `3 + 4j`, and so like you can put this `j` value in Python and have complex numbers by default. And Python can manipulate those complex numbers. They're just a class. 

Containers are... right, we talked about this just a second ago, how computers process things in bulk and so how they store things in bulk in memory. So lots of times when we're talking about these things, we're talking about in-memory. And when I say memory, I mean random access memory (RAM)珦ort of the not the fastest, but the temporary, decently fast storage that your CPU has access to. So it can put things in this big long list of, you know, probably capacitive DRAM type memory in practice, but it's this big list of memory that is only able to be accessed when the power is on and then it's lost, it's not persistent. 

This is not memory like hard drive memory, like flash memory that it's permanent storage or semi-permanent I should say, but it's going to be there when the power is off. And so when your program is running it's allocated by the operating system, you have this block of memory and you can ask for more if you want it, but when that program is running it can sort of say "I want a list of these things" and maybe it reads from a file and puts it in that list of things. Or maybe it wants to do things a little bit more sophisticated, so the sort of a list in Python is your most generic way of storing things. 

But you can do other stuff as well. You can use dictionaries. Classes are actually another form of sort of like larger-scale storage. But dictionaries are probably the most second-most common after lists. And then you can get a little more complicated if you bring in a library like NumPy where you can be a little bit more specific about the type of thing that's going in there. 

So when you're dealing with lists it can be anything, you can put like an integer next to a string. That usually doesn't make any sense in practice, but even if you're going to put a bunch of integers together, it actually doesn't make any sense to use a list, you should use a NumPy array. And the reason you do that is because an integer can be any size in Python, and so what it actually stores if you store a list of integers is it stores a list of references to where the integers are, which is just not that efficient in practice. 

And so NumPy's much better because if you store a list of integers, instead of storing a list of integers it stores a list of like `int64`s, for example, which means "I'm going to use just 64 bits for those integers and we're going to stack them all together," and that means when the computer goes to process them it processes them all in bulk very, very fast through these like very high-hyper-like hyper-scale parallel architectural components that it has for doing computation. 

Right? Doing addition and stuff like that. You'll actually learn that when you do𡟙f you've taken like logic design and stuff like that𨫎ell, maybe not logic design, you take like a computer architecture class, you'll learn about how you build systems that process data really, really fast in bulk. But it's very important when you're writing a program to sort of acknowledge what's fast on a computer, what's not, right? So what's really not fast is when it has to jump around in memory all over this place because the CPU when it goes to add those things has to do all that work to bring it all together and then go process it instead of just having it there already. 

Now again, AI's going to do these things somewhat intelligently for you as long as you know the problems that you might run into. But I think it's very still very important to be able to read some of these things, acknowledge when things might not be as fast as they could be, get things to optimize and stuff like that. 

Then files, right? So you can open things and close things. A file is really, really simple on a computer. It's just a set of binary. But it's slow. So you can store lots of stuff persistently, but for the most part you operate in memory. You have a finite amount of memory, so your computer probably has 16 gigs of memory𤧥ost of you, some of you might have more than that𤪳ut whatever reason 16 gigs is like the dominant amount right now and it hasn't really increased in the last 10 years, which is nuts. There was a period where we were like doubling every year and then just stopped for some reason. 

And by the way, DRAM's gotten super expensive right now and so it's probably not going to keep going up. I have no idea why. It has something to do with the fabs going and building AI chips instead of building memory chips. There's some weirdness happening right now in the marketplace, but RAM is very expensive right now. And so you're not going to get a whole lot more than 16 gigabytes which is a lot炥robably 16 billion, right? It's a big number of bytes. Kind of unfathomable, actually, but really not that big when you're talking about the sizes of hard drives, which are in the terabyte ranges typically now. You probably have one, two terabytes. 

If you're on a MacBook, you probably didn't opt for that two-terabyte version because it's super expensive. But maybe you have, you know, 512 gigabytes of hard drive space. That's way slower than your memory, I mean usually at least an order of magnitude slower for your processor. So for the most part you read stuff from file into memory and then you process the stuff that's in memory. 

But file very simple: you can open them, write stuff, you can kind of jump around them and stuff like that. But they're for writing persistently. And usually you don't actually use files directly, like it's pretty rare to actually write a file with opening the `open` command in or and then write and then writing things directly on a file pointer. Typically you're going to use a library for some like structured file format. Might be a CSV, for example, which is just text file but still you're going to use a library that sits on top of that for processing that that type of file. Because most of the time we don't just operate on binary files; they have some extension on them that tells you or gives you a clue of what's inside them, the structure of that thing. 

File is a file. Really, the operating system does not care what is in that file. It is literally there's this block of things it's called this, program do what you want with this, right? You actually go and you have to use a library that then interprets that format in a very specific way and does something with it. Might be again an XLS file which is like a binary format that Microsoft publishes. It is known now, it used to be proprietary. You know, could be a .doc file for Microsoft, it could be a .py file which is just a text file. Nothing𤤖r should be just a text file, doesn't have to be. 

Actually no reason it has to be. It could be like a .blob, it could be whatever you want to call it. Actually that extension is meaningless, just gives you a clue. So doesn't actually have any true meaning, just gives you a clue of what might be in that file. And so just that that topic in general is interesting, a lot of ways to organize things efficiently but you should know that that is not really what programs are operating on鍟hey are operating typically on memory, right? These sort of lists, containers. You can use sets if you want. Dictionaries very useful for like naming things. A lot of this is just about the programmer and what they choose to do. You really don't need a lot of this stuff to write programs. 

You can write programs銄emember from the first time I talked about this鎆ou know, if you just have some ability to store stuff somewhere in an organized way, right? Be able to put things in memory in these numbers. Basic logic and you have the ability to process that logic in some way and branch. So you have the ability to say "If this, then that," which is the next topic: conditional statements, right? 

So storage, one part you need to have for have a computer. Conditional statements is sort of the other one that you really need to have. You need to have the ability to say "If this, do this," right? So this is where most complexity in programs happen, right? If something is one way then do this, then if it's the other way then do this. It's a branch in the program execution. It's going to go one way, it's going to go the other way. This is the major topic of program optimization, by the way. 

Why? Very, very complicated to fully explain, but suffice to say that if you don't know where you're going, you can't predict, right? And if you can't predict, you essentially have to stop and wait. And then once you get there, then you decide what you're going to do, all right? Now, if you just have two choices, you can say, "Well, I'm going to kind of predict what I'll do in both of those cases and then whichever one happens, I'm good to go," right? But what if there's tons of these and what if it's going so fast that you can't even predict? Like, that's a really expensive thing to try to predict them. 

And so a lot of the optimization actually inside of computers𡐤ike all the really the hard work of computer architecture𡟙s done on prediction now, to try to predict what's going to happen in the case of these branches. Hold on just a second, I need to actually address that. All right. 

So, conditional statements: very simple in Python. If this is true then do this body block, whatever's inside the if statement, otherwise continue on, right? So simple branch in there. But again, a lot of the problems with optimization are because of branch statements. This is like really, really obvious starting to get into GPU programming because GPUs, this hyper-hyper-parallel thing, and you could write programs for the GPU, but the problem is that the program is running in maybe, you know, 16, 20, 100 like parallel operations all operating on the same data. And if just one of them goes a different way, it has to redo the whole thing. 

And so really, really important to understand branching in practice and sort of why it's relevant. But remember, computers nowadays hyper-parallel machines and parallelism and and they're they predict a lot. They're trying to constantly trying to pull data from slow memory into fast memory and they're trying to predict what's next so they can pull more of that so it can all be ready and ready to go so they can constantly churn out and pump through data as fast as possible. 

And the second these branches don't work out, they slow down. They have to literally stop what they're doing, erase what they've done in many cases, and then go and continue on after they fix that problem. And so branching is a very important part of optimization; it's a fundamental part of computing though. And so it's always this balance, like what is the most likely thing that's going to happen and how can I ensure that that's going to happen most of the time? 

It does tell you actually a lot about how you should design programs. You should avoid actually like large nested if statements if you can. These can be really bad. If this, then inside of that, if that, and then inside of that, if that, and then inside of that, if that. If you find yourself creating like a lot of big nesting statements, chances are that program might not be as optimal as it should be, or could be. And so there's usually ways to write code that you have less nesting. Less nesting usually better than more nesting. It's also harder to read really highly nested programs where you have an if statement inside of an if statement inside of an if statement. Very hard to follow logic of that. 

And so several reasons not to do that, but again, if statement is one basic forms of conditional statements in Python. Iterative statements are the other form of conditional statement, okay? So this is how computers repeat themselves, or how programs repeat themselves. Computers repeat themselves by literally an operation called a branch operation. And so it's very similar to the if statement actually, so they're really from a computer standpoint they're not any different. If statement and while statement are𡟙f you go down into the instruction level where the computer is actually running these instructions, they're the same thing. 

It's just that the if statement just says "skip" and go further down, go to this place down here that's later𨫎hatever that means to a computer, there is no later to a computer. But skip here. And all a while statement it says "go back to one previously" and then continue on from there. That's it. But from a programmer's standpoint, a while statement means repeat, meaning you're going to actually hit this instruction again. 

And so kind of again going back to like the really, really basics: computers operate by going instruction, instruction, instruction, instruction, instruction鍟hey literally have a program counter that is tied to a memory which brings in the next instruction and then it iterates by by one effectively, and then go to the next instruction, go to the next instruction, right? So there is an order in a computer that it processes instruction. And a while statement just goes means it goes before, right? So it will hit that statement again, and an if statement skips. That's it. 

And so while is almost identical to if, except for it goes to a previous point in the program effectively to run again. And when writing it, it's `while` some expression, right? So `while` this is true, meaning `if` this is true, do this body and then do it again and then check the if statement again. It would be better written as like "loop if this break out" or "if not this break out" because the while statement a lot of people like when they first start programming, they look at the while statement and they're like "at any point if this expression becomes false immediately stop," and that's not how it works. It's only when it checks it at first, then do it, and check it and then do it. And so even if the condition, the expression, becomes false midway through the body, it's not going to exit until it comes back. 

And this is all just a review to you, but it's very important to know that this is... these are the fundamental pieces: storage, conditional statements, iterative statements, really all the same thing. Types of iterative statements: we've got the `for` statement as well in Python, right? So for a set of things typically, it's more useful in practice for a lot of cases where you're just iterating through a set of things. 

And then functions are another kind of major piece of the programming puzzle, not necessarily operation of computer puzzle, where we have a function that does something for us and we can abstract it away as just doing that thing. "I need you to add two numbers. I don't care how you add the two numbers, just always give me the right answer back." And something else is filled in there, but we can just think about it as adding now instead of having to decide, well how do I add bits of numbers? 

The computer knows how to add bits of numbers, we don't have to think about it. It's a process that it goes through to add bits of numbers. Technically it's just an instruction, but you can do very, very complex operations inside a function and then abstract them where you don't have to think about it anymore. Maybe it's just calculate the voltage of this voltage divider, right? The output voltage. Here's $R_1$, here's $R_2$, give me the answer, don't care how you solve that, just give me back the answer. 

Right? And this is another part of optimization. So if you have something written as a function, it does some specific task, now you can go through and optimize the heck out of that and as long as it always produces the right answer you don't care how it got there. Optimization generally follows typically from abstraction. So we can first abstract, then we optimize. 

All right, then we talked about classes and objects. There's an example class in here. I'm going fast because I want to distribute the M5Stacks so you have something to play around with. So, Ollie, you want to help me distribute the M5Stacks? 

So we're right at the end of class. I'm going to hand you one of these and you are going to figure out how to put those things together by looking at this first lecture. Just hand them out as as they get them. So, yep. All right, you're going to be getting one of these M5Stack C+ 1s or 2s, all right? This is an M5Stack C+ 1. Don't think that the 2 is better, it's not, it's different. It is better in some ways: it's got more memory, it's got a slightly bigger display or higher resolution display. 

They released this the M5C+... M5Stack C+ 2 like six months after the M5Stack C+ 1, and I think it was a supply chain thing. And so they switched around the USB controller that's inside this, they took out the power management chip, which actually really annoying, but they upgraded some things, so it's got a little bit more flash memory. Anyway, it's not really any better; they're programmed using the exact same toolchain, so it's not a problem. 

But they've got a lot of stuff in there. I talked about this already about this at the beginning of class. And so we're going to be using this as a way to to think about complex programming more than that this is just some like crazy useful thing. This is a microcontroller. It's really a whole system, but it's the type of thing that electrical engineers often work with, okay? And you can use this as an IoT device. It doesn't need to be connected to your computer to run. I have a program running on this already, this little like bubble level program, which should start if I turn it on. Come on, turn on. 

All right, I take it back. I don't know why it's not running. Clearly my little thing is broken. Anyway, so these don't... these have a battery inside them, they're their own computer. They they can run independently. They actually have, I think these are magnetic, they've got a magnet in them. And so they can literally be put places, they've got an accelerometer, gyroscope in them, they've got Wi-Fi, they've got Bluetooth, they're their own little device. And we're going to learn to program them, we're going to make them talk. 

And we're also going to deal with the complexity of programming that AI can't solve for you, okay? Which is "Why the heck is this not computing... like why is it not communicating with this other thing? Right? Why is... it doesn't know about anything about this. It's its own entity that's sitting over here that's running its independent program. Why is it not behaving? It's collecting real-world data, right? Why is it not doing what I want it to do?" 

And that's sort of the complexities of real-world programming is like why is this thing not working and how do we go through the debugging steps necessary to solve that, right? Send the data across, validate it, make sure things are going to work properly in various cases. 

And so anyway, everybody in here is getting one of these. They're only $20. If you break it, you buy it. You program it using a variety of different things, but you need to go through this slide, this slide four, okay? The getting up and running. So everybody in class, your assignment before Monday𤪔opefully we have class Monday𡟙s to get your M5Stack up and running. It's a product, right? You can Google it. I don't really need to teach you any of this; there's plenty of instructions online about how to get up and running on your particular platform. 

You need to do this, okay? I expect everybody to have a program running on their M5Stack C+ 1 or 2 on Monday. It's not... it's not difficult, I promise. It can be annoying because of the peculiarities of your individual computers, all right? And so some of you this will take a minute; some of you this will take several days. And I can't predict which one is which because everybody's got their own again... their own computers. It's part of the challenge. It's going to happen to everybody where you're going to run into problems you can't seem to solve. 

Send messages out on Discord, get help. So hopefully it's easy, but it's actually better for you if it's not. Click on the right button, make sure you're going through the right install process. We're going to be using Arduino. We're actually also going to be using the Arduino CLI, which is what's underneath Arduino, that integrates actually a lot better with AI tools where you might not even ever have to open up the Arduino IDE, which actually would be a great thing for me because I kind of hate the Arduino IDE, the development environment. 

But you can absolutely get going with this. You can start writing programs for it if you want. I'll be talking a lot about the programming language on Monday鍟he C/C++ programming language㻡nd just like the the way you program these and the things that you need to watch out for when you're programming these. But again, probably the hardest part about all this is like... this is not built into Arduino, and so when you plug it in and you download Arduino, it's not just going to work. You have to make it work. 

So there's tons of microcontroller platforms. Arduino as a software environment... who bought Arduino? It's some company that brought Arduino... was it Qualcomm? Yeah, Qualcomm bought Arduino. And so it used to be completely like this like open-source consortium, like its own entity, now it's owned by Qualcomm and they're starting to release like industrial things. 

Arduino is serious now, by the way. It used to be this hobbyist platform, it's totally serious now. It's a very elaborate ecosystem. But anyway, they can't possibly have every board in there because there's thousands of boards that that have their own way of configuring the underlying microcontroller, which is the ESP32. That's in Arduino, but not every board that is built around it. It needs to know how everything is plugged in and interconnected. And so anyway, you have to install the board for the M5Stack C+ 2. Once you get there, then you can start𡟙t'll start not seeing it, but you can start assigning it and then programming it. But you need to have that board file first. 

All right? So follow the instructions and you'll get it up and running. All right, bye everybody! Hopefully I see you Monday. Did everyone get one? Yeah, everyone got one. They be going "Why I didn't get one?"

***

### **AI Summary**

In this lecture, the professor introduces the M5Stack device as a key learning platform for the semester, emphasizing its relevance to electrical engineers working with embedded systems. The session serves as a transition from general Python programming to hardware-specific applications.

#### **Key Topics Covered:**
*   **M5Stack Introduction:** The professor presents the M5Stack (specifically the C+1 and C+2 models), an ESP32-powered device with built-in sensors, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth. He highlights its role as a representative of modern integrated embedded systems.
*   **Python for Circuit Analysis:** A practical exercise involves writing a Python script to calculate the output voltage and power dissipation of a voltage divider. This serves to review:
    *   **Ohm𠏋 Law ($V=IR$):** The fundamental relationship between voltage, current, and resistance.
    *   **Power Calculations:** Using $P = V \times I$ or $P = I^2 \times R$ to determine heat loss (resistive heating).
    *   **Optimization & Abstraction:** The importance of using functions and NumPy arrays for efficient data processing and code reuse.
*   **Software Development Workflow:**
    *   **Git & GitHub:** A refresher on version control, focusing on the distinction between local commits (logical steps) and remote pushes (collaboration/backup).
    *   **Environment Management:** Encouraging the use of specific Conda environments and tools like VS Code for consistent development.
*   **Programming Concepts:** A deeper look into Python's object-oriented nature, the efficiency of memory allocation (RAM vs. persistent storage), and the architectural impact of conditional branching (`if` statements) on computer performance.

#### **Assignments & Action Items:**
*   **Device Setup:** Students are tasked with setting up the M5Stack on their personal computers before the next class. This includes installing the Arduino IDE (or CLI) and the necessary board manager files for the ESP32/M5Stack.
*   **Community Support:** Students are encouraged to use Discord to troubleshoot installation issues, as hardware-to-software interfacing can vary significantly between different operating systems and machines.